[Docs] Improve the "Update existing data" tutorial (#16081)
apache/druid: docs/tutorials/tutorial-update-data.md

```sql
REPLACE INTO "update_tutorial"
   OVERWRITE
       WHERE "__time" >= TIMESTAMP'2024-01-03 05:00:00' AND "__time" < TIMESTAMP'2024-01-03 06:00:00'
SELECT 
   "__time", 
   "animal", 
   CAST(486 AS BIGINT) AS "number"
FROM "update_tutorial" 
WHERE TIME_IN_INTERVAL("__time", '2024-01-03T05:01:35Z/PT1S')
PARTITIONED BY FLOOR(__time TO HOUR)
```

<details>
<summary> View the results</summary>

| `__time` | `animal` | `number`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-02T01:01:35.000Z`| `lion`| 300 |
| `2024-01-02T05:01:35.000Z`| `mongoose`| 737 |
| `2024-01-02T06:01:35.000Z`| `snake`| 1234 |
| `2024-01-02T07:01:35.000Z`| `octopus`| 115 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `flamingo`| 999 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `tiger`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T05:01:35.000Z`| `polecat`| 486 |
| `2024-01-03T06:01:35.000Z`| `iguana`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T07:01:35.000Z`| `seahorse`| 500 |

</details>

Note that the `number` for `polecat` has changed from 626 to 486.

> When you perform partial segment overshadowing multiple times, you can create fragmentation. Use [compaction](../data-management/compaction.md) to consolidate fragmented segments and remove the overshadowed areas of the earlier granularity segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you perform partial segment overshadowing multiple times, you can create segment fragmentation that could affect query performance. Use [compaction](../data-management/compaction.md) to correct any fragmentation.
```
I don't know that we need to get into the consolidation and overshadowing in the tutorial level.

  ~ under the License.
  -->

> :::info

Reviewer: Suggest removing the admonition. The "This tutorial" statement says it uses SQL and all the examples are SQL.

Apache Druid supports two query languages: [Druid SQL](../querying/sql.md) and [native queries](../querying/querying.md).
This document describes the SQL language.

:::

Apache Druid stores data and indexes in [segment files](../design/segments.md) partitioned by time.
Once segments are created, they cannot be modified.

> To update existing data, you must rebuild and republish the segments.

Reviewer: This is not entirely true, since you can overshadow portions of a segment. (Overwrite a specific row)

Maybe in most cases, to updated data, you should overwrite the segment you want to change (it's only 1 step so rebuild & republish seems like too much detail for tutorial level). In some cases you can overshadow a portion of a segment using a smaller segment granularity than the original segment.

Author: Updated text.

> Druid updates existing data using time ranges, not primary key. Data outside the replacement time range is not touched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Druid use time ranges to specify data to update, not primary key or dimensions like you may be familiar with in transactional databases. Data outside the specified replacement time range is not touched.
```

Reviewer: I would also add here:  You can use this functionality in Druid to perform data updates, inserts, and deletes, similar to UPSERT functionality for transactional databases.

(we need to have UPSERT mentioned somewhere)

Author: Updated text

This tutorial shows you how to use the Druid SQL [REPLACE](../multi-stage-query/reference.md#replace) function with the OVERWRITE clause to update existing data.

The tutorial walks you through the following use cases:

* [Overwrite all data](#overwrite-all-data)
* [Overwrite a specific row](#overwrite-a-specific-row)
* [Update a row using partial segment overshadowing](#update-a-row-using-partial-segment-overshadowing)

All examples use the [multi-stage query (MSQ)](../multi-stage-query/index.md) task engine to executes SQL statements.

## Prerequisites

Before you follow the steps in this tutorial, download Druid as described in [Quickstart (local)](index.md) and have it running on your local machine. You don't need to load any data into the Druid cluster.

You should be familiar with data querying in Druid. If you haven't already, go through the [Query data](../tutorials/tutorial-query.md) tutorial first.

> ## Load initial data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Load sample data
```

    '{"type":"json"}'
  )
) EXTEND ("timestamp" VARCHAR, "animal" VARCHAR, "number" BIGINT))
SELECT
  TIME_PARSE("timestamp") AS "__time",
  "animal",
  "number"
FROM "ext"
PARTITIONED BY DAY
```

<details>
<summary> View the results</summary>

| `__time` | `animal` | `number`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-02T01:01:35.000Z`| `lion`| 300 |
| `2024-01-02T05:01:35.000Z`| `mongoose`| 737 |
| `2024-01-02T06:01:35.000Z`| `snake`| 1234 |
| `2024-01-02T07:01:35.000Z`| `octopus`| 115 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `opossum`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T05:01:35.000Z`| `skunk`| 737 |
| `2024-01-03T06:01:35.000Z`| `iguana`| 1234 |
| `2024-01-03T07:01:35.000Z`| `seahorse`| 115 |

</details>

Note that the values in the `__time` column have changed to one day later.

> ## Overwrite a specific row

Reviewer: This looks like overwrite a segment for the day 2024-01-03 00:00:00

Author: Maybe "Overwrite records for a specific time range"?

    '{"type":"json"}'
  )
) EXTEND ("timestamp" VARCHAR, "animal" VARCHAR, "number" BIGINT))
SELECT
  TIME_PARSE("timestamp") AS "__time",
  "animal",
  "number"
FROM "ext"
PARTITIONED BY DAY
```

<details>
<summary> View the results</summary>

| `__time` | `animal` | `number`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-02T01:01:35.000Z`| `lion`| 300 |
| `2024-01-02T05:01:35.000Z`| `mongoose`| 737 |
| `2024-01-02T06:01:35.000Z`| `snake`| 1234 |
| `2024-01-02T07:01:35.000Z`| `octopus`| 115 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `flamingo`| 999 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `tiger`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T05:01:35.000Z`| `polecat`| 626 |
| `2024-01-03T06:01:35.000Z`| `iguana`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T07:01:35.000Z`| `seahorse`| 500 |

</details>

Note the changes in the resulting datasource:

* There is now a new row called `flamingo`.
* The `opossum` row has the value `tiger`.
* The `skunk` row has the value `polecat`.
* The `iguana` and `seahorse` rows have different numbers.

## Update a row using partial segment overshadowing

In Druid, you can overlay older data with newer data for the entire segment or portions of the segment within a particular partition.

> This capability is commonly referred to as [overshadowing](../ingestion/tasks.md#overshadowing-between-segments).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This capability is called as [overshadowing](../ingestion/tasks.md#overshadowing-between-segments).
```

:::info

> The overshadow relation holds only for the same time chunk and the same datasource.

Reviewer: I don't understand this.

Author: I'll remove it since [Overshadowing between segments](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/ingestion/tasks#overshadowing-between-segments) covers it.

:::

You can use partial overshadowing to update a single row by adding a smaller time granularity segment on top of the existing data.

> It's a niche variation on a more common approach where you replace the entire time chunk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a less common variation on a more common approach where you replace the entire time chunk.
```
niche reads a little twee to me here.

Note the following important points about the example:

* The query updates a single record for a specific `number` row.
* The original datasource uses DAY segment granularity.
* The new data segment is at HOUR granularity and represents a time range that's smaller than the existing data.
* The OVERWRITE WHERE and WHERE TIME_IN_INTERVAL clauses specify the destination where the update occurs and the source of the update, respectively.
* The query replaces everything within the specified interval. To update only a subset of data in that interval, you have to carry forward all records, changing only what you want to change. You can accomplish that by using the [CASE](../querying/sql-functions.md#case) function in the SELECT list.

```sql
REPLACE INTO "update_tutorial"
   OVERWRITE
       WHERE "__time" >= TIMESTAMP'2024-01-03 05:00:00' AND "__time" < TIMESTAMP'2024-01-03 06:00:00'
SELECT 
   "__time", 
   "animal", 
   CAST(486 AS BIGINT) AS "number"
FROM "update_tutorial" 
WHERE TIME_IN_INTERVAL("__time", '2024-01-03T05:01:35Z/PT1S')
PARTITIONED BY FLOOR(__time TO HOUR)
```

> 

Reviewer: Can we create a new topic with the append data example we created?

Author: Yes, I'll add a new topic for it.

<details>
<summary> View the results</summary>

| `__time` | `animal` | `number`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-02T01:01:35.000Z`| `lion`| 300 |
| `2024-01-02T05:01:35.000Z`| `mongoose`| 737 |
| `2024-01-02T06:01:35.000Z`| `snake`| 1234 |
| `2024-01-02T07:01:35.000Z`| `octopus`| 115 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `flamingo`| 999 |
| `2024-01-03T01:01:35.000Z`| `tiger`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T05:01:35.000Z`| `polecat`| 486 |
| `2024-01-03T06:01:35.000Z`| `iguana`| 300 |
| `2024-01-03T07:01:35.000Z`| `seahorse`| 500 |

</details>

Note that the `number` for `polecat` has changed from 626 to 486.

> When you perform partial segment overshadowing multiple times, you create fragmentation. Use [compaction](../data-management/compaction.md) to consolidate fragmented segments and remove the overshadowed areas of the earlier granularity segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you perform partial segment overshadowing multiple times, you can create fragmentation. Use [compaction](../data-management/compaction.md) to consolidate fragmented segments and remove the overshadowed areas of the earlier granularity segment.
```
